docs: Traceloop SDK integration documentation (#9514)
langflow-ai/langflow: docs/docs/Integrations/integrations-instana-traceloop.mdx

This guide demonstrates how to integrate the Instana observability platform with your Langflow application using the Traceloop SDK so you can monitor and analyze LLM performance.

## Before you begin

- Create a [Traceloop API key](https://app.traceloop.com/settings/api-key)
- Create an [Instana endpoint and Instana key](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/instana-observability/1.0.302)
- [Install and start Langflow](/get-started-installation)

## Configure environment variables

### Step 1: Create environment file
Create a `.env` file in your Langflow application root directory.

### Step 2: Add Traceloop API key
```dotenv
TRACELOOP_API_KEY=<your_traceloop_api_key>
```
This variable authenticates your application with Traceloop's monitoring service.

### Step 3: Set base URL
```dotenv
TRACELOOP_BASE_URL=<instana_endpoint>
```
This variable configures the Instana endpoint for telemetry data. Example: `https://otlp-magenta-saas.instana.rocks:4318`

### Step 4: Add Instana headers
```dotenv
TRACELOOP_HEADERS="x-instana-key=<your_instana_key>"
```
This variable provides authentication for Instana data collection.

> ### Step 5: Configure OTLP security

Reviewer: @coderabbitai @2getsandesh  May i know what is OTLP is? if so how do know what value to set? can yo provide more context?

```dotenv
OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_INSECURE=false
```
Set to `false` for HTTPS endpoints, `true` only for plain HTTP endpoints.

### Step 6: Set metrics endpoint
```dotenv
TRACELOOP_METRICS_ENDPOINT=host.docker.internal:8000
```
This variable configures a separate metrics endpoint (typically for Docker environments).

### Step 7: Enable metrics collection
```dotenv
TRACELOOP_METRICS_ENABLED=true
OTEL_METRIC_EXPORT_INTERVAL=10000
```
These variables enable metrics collection with 10-second export intervals.

### Step 8: Configure OpenTelemetry Collector

> Make sure the OpenTelemetry (OTel) Collector is running. In your Collector's `config.yaml`, add the following values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure the OpenTelemetry (OTEL) Collector is running. In your Collector's `config.yaml`, add the following values:
```

---
title: Traceloop
slug: /integrations-instana-traceloop
description: Instrument Langflow with the Traceloop SDK and export traces and metrics to Instana using OpenTelemetry.
---

Traceloop SDK is a lightweight instrumentation toolkit designed for LLM (Large Language Model) applications. It enables developers to automatically capture and export traces, metrics, and key observability signals from their LLM-powered workflows.

When combined with Instana, the exported telemetry data from Traceloop provides end-to-end visibility, allowing users to visualize traces, analyze performance bottlenecks, and ensure reliable operation of LLM-driven applications.

This guide demonstrates how to integrate the Instana observability platform with your Langflow application using the Traceloop SDK so you can monitor and analyze LLM performance.

> ## Before you begin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites
```

- Create a [Traceloop API key](https://app.traceloop.com/settings/api-key)
- Create an [Instana endpoint and Instana key](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/instana-observability/1.0.302)
- [Install and start Langflow](/get-started-installation)

## Configure environment variables

> ### Step 1: Create environment file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a `.env` file in your Langflow application root directory.
```
The steps shouldn't be headers, they're just steps.
See the [Google Developer Style Guide](https://developers.google.com/style/procedures)

Create a `.env` file in your Langflow application root directory.

### Step 2: Add Traceloop API key
```dotenv

> TRACELOOP_API_KEY=<your_traceloop_api_key>

Reviewer 2: Consider presenting the `.env` file completely, then include the list of each variable with some information about what it does and where to find it.
For example: [Arize](https://docs.langflow.org/integrations-arize#connect-arize-to-langflow)

### Step 4: Add Instana headers
```dotenv
TRACELOOP_HEADERS="x-instana-key=<your_instana_key>"
```
This variable provides authentication for Instana data collection.

### Step 5: Configure OpenTelemetry Protocol(OTLP) security
Check your Instana endpoint URL from Step 3.
#### For secure connections (HTTPS/TLS)
```dotenv
OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_INSECURE=false
```

#### For insecure connections (HTTP, local development)
```dotenv
OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_INSECURE=true
```
For production Instana SaaS endpoints (like https://otlp-magenta-saas.instana.rocks:4318), typically use `false`

### Step 6: Set metrics endpoint
```dotenv
TRACELOOP_METRICS_ENDPOINT=host.docker.internal:8000
```
This variable configures a separate metrics endpoint (typically for Docker environments).

### Step 7: Enable metrics collection
```dotenv
TRACELOOP_METRICS_ENABLED=true
OTEL_METRIC_EXPORT_INTERVAL=10000
```
These variables enable metrics collection with 10-second export intervals.

### Step 8: Configure OpenTelemetry Collector
Make sure the OpenTelemetry (OTEL) Collector is running. In your Collector's `config.yaml`, add the following values:

```yaml

> # Example values — update to your environment

Reviewer 2: We generally tell users to replace the values outside of the code sample.
For example, see [Step 2](https://docs.langflow.org/mcp-tutorial#create-a-python-application-that-connects-to-langflow)

llm.application: "LLM_DC"
instances:
   -  otel.agentless.mode: true
      # Example endpoint: https://otlp-magenta-saas.instana.rocks:4318
      otel.backend.url: "<INSTANA_ENDPOINT>"
      otel.backend.using.http: false
      callback.interval: 10
      otel.service.name: "DC1"
      otel.service.port: 8000
      currency: "USD"
```

This configuration enables the OTel Collector to operate in agentless mode and route telemetry data to your Instana backend. The configuration specifies the Instana endpoint, service identification, and collection intervals needed for proper monitoring integration.

## Start Langflow with environment variables

Launch your Langflow application using the environment file:
```bash
uv run langflow run --env-file .env
```

Traceloop automatically begins monitoring and collecting telemetry data from your LLM applications.

## Verify the integration

To verify that observability is working correctly:

1. Run a flow in Langflow to generate traffic.
2. To view traces in Instana, open Instana and click **Applications**.
3. In **Services**, search for `Langflow`.

> 4. Click Langflow to view and analyze the associated calls.

Reviewer 2: Add the instana dashboard image here

Author: Do you mean Langflow dashboard image?

5. To view metrics in Instana, open Instana and click **Infrastructure**.
6. In **Analyze Infrastructure**, click **Otel LLMonitor**.
7. To view your Metrics dashboard, click `LLM:DC1@your_machine_name.local`.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add the Instana metrics dashboard image here

### Instana Traces Dashboard
![Instana Traces dashboard](/img/instana-traces-dashboard.png)

### Instana Metrics Dashboard
![Instana Metrics dashboard](/img/instana-metrics-dashboard.png)

> ## What's next

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## See also
```

> For additional configuration options and advanced features, see the [Traceloop](https://www.traceloop.com/docs/introduction) or [Instana](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/instana-observability/current) documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Traceloop documentation](https://www.traceloop.com/docs/introduction)
* [Instana documentation](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/instana-observability/current)
```

slug: /integrations-instana-traceloop
description: Instrument Langflow with the Traceloop SDK and export traces and metrics to Instana using OpenTelemetry.
---

Traceloop SDK is a lightweight instrumentation toolkit designed for LLM (Large Language Model) applications. It enables developers to automatically capture and export traces, metrics, and key observability signals from their LLM-powered workflows.

When combined with Instana, the exported telemetry data from Traceloop provides end-to-end visibility, allowing users to visualize traces, analyze performance bottlenecks, and ensure reliable operation of LLM-driven applications.

This guide demonstrates how to integrate the Instana observability platform with your Langflow application using the Traceloop SDK so you can monitor and analyze LLM performance.

## Prerequisites

- Create a [Traceloop API key](https://app.traceloop.com/settings/api-key)
- Create an [Instana endpoint and Instana key](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/instana-observability/1.0.302)
- [Install and start Langflow](/get-started-installation)

## Configure environment variables

1. In the root directory of your Langflow application, create a `.env` file.

> 2. Add your Traceloop and Instana credentials to the `.env` file:

Reviewer 2: This should be broken up into steps for each variable. Tell users what this does and why they are adding it, and any configuration issues (like the HTTP/HTTPS setting) to be aware of.

description: Instrument Langflow with the Traceloop SDK and export traces and metrics to Instana using OpenTelemetry.
---

Traceloop SDK is a lightweight instrumentation toolkit designed for LLM (Large Language Model) applications. It enables developers to automatically capture and export traces, metrics, and key observability signals from their LLM-powered workflows.

When combined with Instana, the exported telemetry data from Traceloop provides end-to-end visibility, allowing users to visualize traces, analyze performance bottlenecks, and ensure reliable operation of LLM-driven applications.

This guide demonstrates how to integrate the Instana observability platform with your Langflow application using the Traceloop SDK so you can monitor and analyze LLM performance.

## Prerequisites

- Create a [Traceloop API key](https://app.traceloop.com/settings/api-key)
- Create an [Instana endpoint and Instana key](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/instana-observability/1.0.302)
- [Install and start Langflow](/get-started-installation)

## Configure environment variables

1. In the root folder of your Langflow application, edit your existing Langflow `.env` file or create a new one.

> Copy the script below into that file, then update the placeholder values with the details you collected in the previous step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Copy the script below into that file, then update the placeholder values with the details from your deployment.
```

> ```dotenv

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```text
```
(sorry the parser doesn't take dotenv as a type)

   - **OTEL_METRIC_EXPORT_INTERVAL** - Interval in milliseconds for metrics export. Set to `10000` for 10-second export intervals, or adjust based on your monitoring requirements.

2. Make sure the OpenTelemetry Data Collector (OTel DC) is running and correctly set up.
Open your Collector’s `config.yaml` file, copy in the configuration shown below, and replace the placeholder values with the ones that match your setup or requirements.

```yaml
# Example values — update to your environment
llm.application: "LLM_DC"
instances:
   -  otel.agentless.mode: true
      # Example endpoint: https://otlp-magenta-saas.instana.rocks:4318
      otel.backend.url: "<INSTANA_ENDPOINT>"
      otel.backend.using.http: false
      callback.interval: 10
      otel.service.name: "DC1"
      otel.service.port: 8000
      currency: "USD"
```

This configuration enables the OTel Collector to operate in agentless mode and route telemetry data to your Instana backend with proper service identification and collection intervals for effective monitoring integration.

## Start Langflow with environment variables

> Launch your Langflow application using the environment file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Launch your Langflow application using the `.env` file:
```
